hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery again
after leaving you hanging for more than
a month we're back with more Joe and Lai
part 5 this time last episode we left
off right at the founding of the PRC in
1949 after surviving several
assassination attempts the KMT secret
police for years
illness the long march in the Civil War
Joe and Lai got to stand near Mao when
the chairman said those famous remarks
on the tnmn viewing platform on 10 149
around five months before that historic
moment after deciding the drive from the
fragrant hills into the city was
becoming a hassle Joe decided he just
moved Beijing despite Joe's well-known
ascetic taste
he and dummying Chow moved into Cheung
nan high adjacent to the Forbidden City
Chong nan hai thereupon became and still
is today the compound were all China's
top leadership hang their hat Joe's
first office and residence was in ejuice
Yong chul
located in Ying tight if you look at a
map of the Chung non-high compound
you'll see this island in the centre of
the nan hai or South Lake connected to
the shore by a bridge pretty exquisite
in late Chinese history it's best known
as the place where the Empress dowager's
she locked up the Guangxu Emperor after
he went a little bit too far with all
his reforms
it all sounds nice and cozy and with all
the royal comforts one might expect the
truth of the matter was it was in a
terrible state of disrepair but no
matter because after Mao decided it was
time for him to head to Beijing he
coveted Joe's digs and the premier gave
up his eating Thai address and moved his
residence to the ship watching another
pavilion located intial nan hai that was
originally built for Prince wooden you
all remember him he was the father of
the Guangxu Emperor and the grandfather
to the last Emperor Puyi the Sheik wat
een was built in 1910 so Prince chuan
because of the Revolution never got to
kick back and enjoy it despite the
gold-plated address the Sheik wat een
was an
the best shape and Joe's underlings kept
calling for much-needed repairs to be
made but Joe wouldn't have it the way he
saw it China was a poor country
desperately poor and in terrible
financial straits so he didn't want to
set any precedent by fix up his crib and
getting it all nice and comfortable Joe
and donging Chow had to rough it one day
while he was away on one of his many
trips his assistants and secretaries
moved in and started carrying out
repairs and spit the place up a little
to make it at least livable for their
boss when Joe came back and saw this he
was quite livid he angrily told his
staff to take everything away back out
all the repairs and make everything just
the way it was before his business trip
he even brought this matter up at a
state council meeting and said this
wasn't his idea and he was totally
against it but in true Joe fashion he
took full and complete responsibility
for the matter all the other leaders got
the hint and if anyone was looking to
perform a total makeover of their junk
on high digs they shelled the idea to
set an example for everyone like
Caesar's wife Joelle I believed he had
to be above reproach this line of
thought extended to Joe's family as well
he may declare to everyone in his
extended family that they shouldn't
expect any preferential treatment in
fact during the 1920s when he got more
and more involved in the communist
movement in China he severed relations
with most of his family members he made
a couple exceptions though during his
wartime chongqing period he allowed his
ailing father to come live with him
until he passed in 1942 his younger
brother Joe on the show was struggling
with six children and no job Joe
arranged firaon show to secure a rather
menial low-paying job nothing special no
perks Joe did however give his didi a
little boot yet on the side a little
allowance out of his own pocket of
course and he also took three of unshown
Jill dronov his hands to lighten his
brother's load he and dummying Chow
raised these chill
as if they were their own you see Joe
and donging child never had any children
of their own besides his brothers kids
he also assumed responsibility for a
number of other children of martyred
revolutionaries such as twin wave sure
and leepung leepung of course later
served as China's premier from 1987 and
1998 swimway sure we'll get to in part
six or seven and it didn't end there if
the authorities in Hawaiian
jeongsu province had any notions about
marketing the place as the birthplace of
premier Joe and lye they were told by
the premier time not make a fuss about
him or attempt to make Joe out to be
anything special you may recall from
those Tung Xiao ping episodes and dung
was the same exact way so the People's
Republic of China was proclaimed which
was the easy part
and now the time had come to actually
set up the framework for the new
government a month after the founding of
the nation Joe set up the State Council
the closest equivalent to this body in
America would be the entire executive
branch of the government this body is
known in China today as the global yen
and again created by Joe and ly though
when he set it up it was initially
called the jungle yen for the first nine
years of the PRC's history Joe wore two
main hats he was both the premier and
the foreign minister in 1958 Joe will
step down as foreign minister and past
that job that Chagny
joe's manner in which he dealt with his
staff was legendary
first of all if you work directly for
Joe and ly you had no other life you
were on call 24/7 Joe treated them well
and was a very strict but patient
teacher the Joe my office consisted of a
director deputy director and five
secretaries in charge of General Affairs
Foreign Affairs military affairs finance
and the economy by the mid 1950s this
would increase to 18 secretaries as well
see as our story unfolds Joe and Lai
never went against Mao
no one knew miles a dome-like
he kept his working hours pegged
directly to miles and mile kept some
pretty weird hours he was a hardcore
night owl for Chairman Mao his day
usually ended around 5:00 in the morning
that meant Jo normally began his day
sometime around 11:00 a.m. he started
off by reading cover to cover the
people's daily Guangming daily
liberation daily and Shanghai's when Wei
Bao not a moment was wasted with Jo he
even used to do the same old shtick that
LBJ used to do seeing his aides
secretaries while he was on the pot
doing his thing in the morning female
employees with something to bring to the
premier would always ask one of their
male counterparts to deliver the
documenter message to the WC
I was wondering how to explain the
magnitude of Jo's responsibilities and
what his day was like as China began its
transformation in the 1950s in a hand
and everything he was a hands-on kind of
manager he had no problem getting his
hands dirty especially in the beginning
when he was still able to casually
mingle with the masses Han suyin in her
book eldest son Jo and lie in the making
of modern China had this to say quote Jo
walked into City markets into shops
checking on the efficiency of razor
blades the quality of shoes the fabric
of ready-made trousers unannounced he
appeared at public canteens queueing up
with bowl and chopsticks to check on the
quality of food if it was bad Jo lined
up the cooks the waiters the manager and
delivered a lecture end quote
Jo's secretary Poole show Chung said
quote no one ever knew what he would do
next where he would turn up and the
people loved that it made everyone take
pride in doing their work right everyone
did their best end quote
jo continued to reach out to and work
with all those non-party members who
despite their skepticism about
everything Mao was saying stay behind
wait and see Jo had always true
to cultivate these intellectuals
capitalists and important figures going
back to the earliest days Joe didn't
believe they should be alienated and
they all had a role to play in national
reconstruction so much needed to be done
the four priorities named by Joe were
economic reconstruction land reform
social reforms and most important of all
designing and building all the critical
government institutions this was another
one of those easier said than done
things as Joe got to work it became
evident from the get-go that there
wasn't enough talent around to fill
these key posts so he turned to these
intellectuals and overseas Chinese and
coax them into joining in on the
rebuilding of China Joe and I served as
premier and named for Vice premiers -
were of the Communist Party - were not
of the top hundred and nine spots in the
global yen ten of the 21 ministers named
by Joe were also not CCP members yeah
Joe and lie it a lot on his plate 21
ministries three commissions for bureaus
and a secretariat and four committees
under Joe ran over 30 institutions but
Joe's other main task at this early
stage was in his capacity as China's
foreign minister and that's what will
mostly focus on today as we'll see it
was never a dull moment for the premier
/ foreign minister and as you recall
from the past four episodes Joe had
worked tirelessly since 1925 handling
the embryonic CCP's diplomacy public
relations and managing every emergency
that reared its ugly head between the
Shanghai Massacre to the founding of the
PRC his years in Chongqing introduced
Joe to many leaders future leaders
politicians and world figures if Joe
thought back then that these contacts
might be important one day he was right
Joe set up the foreign ministry and on
November 8th 1949 everyone
into the old homely Yaman building the
first western-style building and Beijing
built during the bad old days of the
late Qing Dynasty now where the foreign
ministry was concerned Joe only
permitted party members to serve he drew
the line there for his three Vice
foreign ministers Joe picked three men
he could trust completely
these were Wong Josh young Lee kinome
and Zhang Han who other key foreign
ministry people included Wong Bing nan
Chao Guan hua Qian Jing qu bunion Hong
Kong jonghwan Jin and of course the more
well-known in the USA at least Fung Wah
attending to this inner circle at the
foreign ministry were about a hundred
and seventy junior staff by the mid 60s
this number will grow to over 2,000
October 1st 1949 was not only the date
of the founding of the PRC it also
marked the date on the top of the memo
Jo and I sent out to all world
governments saying if they wanted to
have relationship to People's Republic
they had to sever their ties to the
Nationalists now busy regrouping on the
island of Taiwan in addition to this
they had to call for China's seat at the
UN to be occupied by the PRC government
of course this isn't gonna happen until
despite this Fresh Start policy only 11
communist nations signed up the USSR
being the first of course Stalin had his
reservations though if you recall from
the past episode Stalin was no fan of
Mao in fact styled and lost more than a
bit of sleep worrying about Mao becoming
another Tito when I talking Tito from
the Jackson 5 this was marshal Tito of
Yugoslavia who became more of a
competitor to Stalin rather than a loyal
puppets between December 1949 and
January 1950 13 more nations joined the
list of those who recognized the PRC
government as the legitimate government
of the Chinese people and the Chinese
nation
these included Israel India
Pakistan and Burma the foreign powers
have been making themselves comfortable
in China since the time of the opium war
was gonna be a gargantuan task to slowly
pry loose all the influence and
institutions buildings companies and
property back from the British Americans
French and Dutch 1949 there were still
1700 foreign enterprises with a total
investment of 860 million dollars in
China still operating for them time was
running out Jose in charge of taking
that all back and telling the foreign
owners to not let the door slam their
rare ads as they made their way to the
exits some of you may recall from the
recent Jack Jones episode that their
tiny operation and the south bank of the
Yangtze River in Chongqing was one of
these many institutions that were closed
down in this effort Jack Jones friends
ambulance unit and all Christian
missions and missionaries all of them
Joe told that in so many words get out
of here there were 12,000 missionaries
still doing their thing in China at the
time of liberation half of them were
foreigners during this period there
followed a major clamp down on
foreigners and all their goings on in
China and not just this all these
American funded educational institutions
they were ordered to cut their ties with
the US yeah folks there ever was a
payback time this was it in all those
like Jack Jones who thought they might
be able to stay on a little longer turn
out to be terribly disappointed
everything was starting to fall into
place now the world was polarizing like
never before everyone had to tell the
United States they either stood with
them or stick with the Soviet bloc
yeah the heady days of a Dixie mission
we're already feeling like they happen
in a Tang Dynasty this was the time when
the propaganda industrial complexes of
the US and China the ministries of
misinformation began their Golden Age
Joe and I had to deal with
mayor - this was serious business trying
to drum up support for the new China the
u.s. swung a big bat as the decade of
the 50s dawned the PRC was a brand-new
government who know how long this regime
would last the Americans they had the
atom bomb most all nations
opted to keep their chips on Uncle Sam
in December 1949 mile already leaning to
one side took a trip to Moscow arriving
in the 16th the occasion was Stalin's
70th birthday gala believe it or not -
all this time Mao and Stalin had never
met face to face so now the victorious
Mao was going to the Communist sanctum
sanctorum Moscow and I would have liked
it if it had worked out otherwise but
for now he was completely dependent on
the goodwill at the Soviet Union to get
through this terribly challenging period
stalin greeted Mao warmly and the two
guys who couldn't stand each other hit
it off then after this initial photo-op
and ritual BS Stalin went and took a
powder and left Mao and his own
this was a tough couple weeks for
Chairman Mao Stalin inserted him in a
nice touch outside of Moscow and did
everything for Mao except exceed two
miles requests to meet and hammer out a
treaty Mao was grumpy and so out of his
element he really needed Joe to come
save the day and so on January 2nd 1950
Molotov and Mickey on the legendary
Soviet diplomats were part of so much
history told mal that Stalin was ready
to talk Joe and Lai arrived January 20th
now the Soviets knew they had to get
their game face on Joe in so many words
said tomorrow
step aside butch and over the period of
the next several weeks treaty terms were
agreed to and on Valentine's Day 1950 ma
and Stalin agree to the terms of the
Treaty of Friendship Alliance and mutual
assistance it sounds like quite a
comforting guarantee but when you read
the
fine print Stalin only had to come to my
aid if Japan invaded something in 1950
that was not likely mile got three
hundred million dollars in credits with
all kinds of strings attached they had
to be paid back within five years and at
1% interest Stalin agreed to evacuate
Liu Xuan and Dalian by 1952 in Outer
Mongolia part of China under the Ching
now I was hoping to hang on to that real
estate Stalin said they were independent
from now on and that was that in
Mongolia like China leaned in Moscow's
direction this treaty was a textbook
case of how Mao and Joe worked together
Joe was always the closer Mao had the
memory of an elephant but he wasn't a
detail man Joe and Lai you could say
with authority was someone who paid
attention to the XI Chi air Joe and Maya
walked away from this whole experience
thinking friends like this who needs
enemies so shabbily had Stalin treated
his two guests that sowed the seeds for
the sino-soviet split that would happen
a decade later Mao and Joe returned to
Beijing on March 4th 1950 the Korean War
is something like a hundred days away
Joe and I was gonna have to find some
way to fit that one into his busy
schedule anta logically speaking is John
McLaughlin always used to say it's hard
to say how the whole Korean War started
suffice to say On January 12th 1950 US
Secretary of State Dean Acheson in a
speech indicated that the Korean
Peninsula was outside of the u.s.
defense perimeter that imaginary line
ran from the Aleutian Islands to Japan
Okinawa down to the Philippines Korea
and Taiwan they were outside that Golden
Circle in fact back then the Truman
administration had washed their hands of
John kai-shek and we're willing to cut
him loose so soon as Kimmel song heard
this he ran to Stalin and said the
moment has come he was confident that
there was no need to fear any American
involvement in that he could unify the
Korean
insula Stalin in April 1950 gave his
stamp of approval to kim il-song to
prosecute this war but he had one huge
caveat and that was no direct Soviet
involvement Stalin made it clear if Kim
who by the way is already calling
himself the great leader than if he
wanted any additional muscle power go
dial country code 86 and that's how
China got sucked in the great leader
came calling May 1950 visiting Mao and
Beijing he received assurances and
backing from mile at this point no one
was thinking about any direct
involvement of Chinese soldiers in this
matter
in fact Jo was in the midst of
demobilizing a big chunk of the PLA with
the civil war over there seemed little
need to maintain a fighting force of 5.6
million soldiers well the story is well
known Kimmel's song hit assured mouthed
that he had this one in the bag and by
August the whole Peninsula from the Yalu
down to Pusan would belong to the DPRK
enough said Mao on the other hand wasn't
so sure after everything that he had
gone through since practically the Jing
Gong Shan days he was looking to go
cross swords with the USA not yet anyway
Mao had said to Joe he wasn't so sure
kim was gonna pull this off like he said
he was gonna do and he'd a very nagging
suspicion that the US would jump in if
Kim posed a threat to the syngman rhee
government in South Korea and as we all
know that's exactly what happened two
days after North Korean forces crossed
the 38th parallel Dean Acheson are no
Dean Acheson harry s truman ordered
military support for the south korean
government then on July 7th 1950 Wingo's
10th birthday a UN force consisting of
New Zealand Thai Philippine Canadian
Australian Greek and Turkish forces was
put under the command of General Douglas
MacArthur and to dispel any rumors that
we didn't care about Taiwan and junk I
shacks
eight the u.s. seventh Fleet was ordered
to start patrolling the streets of
Taiwan just like a cat arching its back
letting China know don't get any funny
ideas upon learning about this Joe
stepped forward and delivered a scathing
condemnation against the UN in general
and the u.s. in particular for carrying
out such an aggressive act against China
now that the US had laid their cards on
the table Mao and Joe weren't so sure
Kim il-sung's best laid plans we're
gonna turn out like he said now it
seemed almost inevitable that China was
gonna get sucked in a week after the
invasion Joe met with the Soviet
ambassador to inform him that China had
nine divisions ready at the North Korean
border Joe's message was that in the
event that the us-led coalition crossed
the 38th parallel into North Korea he'd
used them Joe requested Soviet air
support in the event that this turn of
events went down we always look at Joe
and lie more as a statesman and a
diplomat than we do a military man as
we've seen in these past episodes he
wasn't some party hack with a desk job
from the earliest times at the Whampoa
Military Academy up through the Civil
War
Joe tasted more than his share of
battles and close calls side-by-side he
had worked with Mao throughout the war
of liberation the Korean War was going
to be his last military assignment
mal put Joe in charge Libya was called
upon to lead the forces into battle but
as the story goes he made a bunch of
excuses and the job got passed to Punk
death why Joe called for 260,000
soldiers to be based along the Yalu
River all were under punz command
at first they were called the
northeastern frontier guards his group
all consisting of PLA soldiers then
became known as the PVA or the people's
volunteer army the jungle red means
period June they were in all reality
plain old-fashioned PLA troops with the
PLA being the official fighting arm of
the PRC and all ma didn't want to make
it seem like China way
actually in this fight against the US
and UN coalition forces so they became
known as the PVA or the CPV a Chinese
people's volunteer army and this fig
leaf for actual Chinese military
involvement fought head-to-head under
some of the most horrible conditions
imaginable
everyone who fought during the winter
months did the PVA's achievements will
provide China's propaganda department in
a fodder to last decades I don't want to
hijack this episode and turn it into an
overview of the Korean War everyone
knows Kim il-sung just blew into South
Korea and took the fight Claire threw
down to Pusan in the South that was the
easy part
Joe and lies military advisers led by
laying fool the Laurentide zoo
warned that the great leader was
stretched a little too thin and the
supply lines Department everyone saw
that the Americans and British had
something up their sleeve probably
something involving cutting Kim's armies
off at the rare most likely at Incheon
Joe thought the same thing this is what
he geared up for he told the Soviets
this was what was coming and he once
again reminded them about that promised
air support for the more than a quarter
million Chinese troops getting into
position along the Chinese side of the
Yalu River the UN forces were really
taking the fight to the North Korean
forces and slowly pushing them back to
where they came from then on September
15 1950 260 ships carrying 70,000 UN
forces led by General Douglas MacArthur
landed at Inchon this was no storming
the beaches of Normandy kind of
operation
these troops landing at Inchon met
almost no resistance at this point
stalin started ranting at kim il-sung
telling him to get the hell out of the
south and to go defend seoul before that
fell into the hands of the americans and
if you think the Chinese government
pulls out their hair today over the
antics of the North Korean government
you should have heard Mao carrying on
about the incompetence of Kim il-sung's
a military leader jodes giving the
soviet ambassador an earful about their
share inability to control him or the
execution of the war not much has
changed since those dismal days back in
August September 1950 Kim was out doing
his thing
not keeping Stalin or Mao terribly
informed of his intentions or strategy
then September 25th Seoul was retaken
North Korean forces faced a very nasty
defeat and eight of their divisions were
completely encircled it was suddenly not
such an outrage as an impossible notion
that Pyongyang might be captured by UN
coalition forces meanwhile MacArthur put
syngman rhee leech hyung-hwan back in
power
the next day Joe issued a statement
warning the u.s. that quote the Chinese
people will not tolerate foreign
aggression nor will they subpoena
tolerate seeing their neighbors being
savagely invaded by imperialists end
quote on China's one-year anniversary
the first-ever Guo Qing MacArthur
ordered South Korean and US troops
across the 38th parallel China's leaders
had no time to celebrate their national
day they were too tied up in meetings
about how to handle the situation they
found themselves in MacArthur was
calling for Kim il-sung's unconditional
surrender at this point the great leader
pressed the panic button and started
desperately asking Mao to come to his
aid Stalin was sitting firmly on his
hands telling kim il-song don't look at
me Mao wasn't left with much choice in
this matter the overriding paramount
issue was that no one in the China
leadership wanted any American troops
annejulien Lee owning border that was
the big picture issue Mao had two main
things in his favor home-field advantage
and numerical superiority he sent a
message to the US via the Indian
ambassador saying in so many words he
crossed the 38th parallel you're gonna
have to deal with China and to that
MacArthur promptly crossed the line Jo
and others in the top echelon of
government and the party
we're not so sure this war was a good
idea but again like always once mouths
mind was made up Joe fell immediately
into line and went to work on October
10th Joe flew to meet Stalin at his
dacha on the Black Sea now it was crunch
time and Joe needed to find out exactly
how helpful stalin was gonna be in this
current crisis Joe repeated his request
for air cover as well as equipment and
ammo for his troops yeah Joe got yeah
add by Stalin and assurances were made
but as we'll see the kind of help China
got from the Soviets was hardly what
they were hoping for Stalin was okay
with the weapons and ammo but when it
came to air support he thought this
might be a little bit too provocative
the last thing he wanted was to openly
turn this flare-up into a proxy war with
the USA and as far as the equipment and
ammo that was no gift when Joe read the
fine print on the agreement that was all
delivered on credit but the promise to
air support
the one thing punked up I really could
have used Stalin was dragging his feet
and telling Joe and two or three months
time he could be ready furthermore when
Joe protested and said he needed Soviet
support now and no lip syncing Stalin
told him if he thought China couldn't
win this to just back out that if kim
il-song went down the toilet on this one
it wasn't gonna be the end of socialism
when the air support finally became
available Stalin refused to fly over
Korean airspace he would only help on
the China side of the Yalu River
nonetheless China entered the war just
one year into the new nations existence
Mao wasn't terribly thrilled that Stalin
was leaving China basically to do the
dirty work and face all the economic and
geopolitical risks of going up against
the US and their allies in this battle
after Joe and live returned to Beijing
on October 18th 1950 the go-ahead was
given for 200,000 people's volunteer
army troops to quietly cross the border
into North Korea the China leadership
knew
was going on with this war but the
jung-hwa law by shing hadn't been
informed yet this task fell to joe to
inform the chinese people what was going
on he did so at a CPPCC Standing
Committee meeting
the main reason given was that this had
to be done to protect China's 500 plus
kilometer northeast border if Kim
il-sung's forces fell the last thing
China wanted was Uncle Sam living next
door with easy access to China's
industrial Manchurian heartland and with
that the come au inch how John Jung
began and the cry went forth from the
posters glued to walls of every don way
in China all the way to the field of
battle
Kang Mei Yin Chao resists America and
defend Korea once
PUMS PVA forces cross the Yalu quietly
the die was cast
Mao like the good old days was the
strategist
the big picture guy Joe and Lai
delegated by Mao and November 13 1950 to
be the one in charge of prosecuting this
war he had to make everything happen
Poong was the top guy in the field
nothing new there the way Joe worked he
made the decision whether something was
important enough to rise to my level it
had to be really important otherwise Joe
handled things personally as I said I'm
not going to turn this into a Korean War
episode suffice to say between the
moment Pung cross the Yalu on October
25th and July 1951 a total of five major
campaigns were fought South Korean
armies that had pushed Claire across the
Yalu were pushed back by PVA forces by
December that year in the freezing cold
korean winter American and Chinese
troops were firing on each other this
was indeed one of the worst times ever
in don't make wine she all the gains
made by MacArthur since Incheon were
lost the American forces were back on
the South Korean side of the 38th
parallel
this was seen as a major victory for the
Chinese PBA forces this ended up being a
long protracted slugfest and no one
could get the better of the other it
seemed in January 1951 Punk's forces
even retook Seoul and for the first time
in the bloody history of warfare 2,000
years after Jukka Liang invented his
repeating crossbow dogfights in the
skies between jet fighters was seen for
the first time but the PBA forces were
getting mowed down like crazy you've
heard before about the human waves of
PBA soldiers who ran right into the
buzzsaw in a Central Military Commission
meeting held on February 24th 1952
puncta White had to pound the table to
make his point he wasn't getting
supported out in the field not by Stalin
and not by the PLA his men were freezing
cold hungry low on weapons and at times
out of ammo and the Spring Offensive of
April May 1951 Poong had lost almost
200,000 men almost a million Chinese
troops disguised as volunteers we're now
in this war one early casualty of this
war was Mao's son from his first wife
young caiway 28-year old man yang known
as volunteer number one was killed in a
u.s. airstrike on November 23rd 1980
HMDA Y had been personally tasked by Mao
to look out for his boy and said Mao
never forgave pong for his son's death
Jo and lie upon hearing of the death
held the news from Mao for several
months the chairman despite never
winning any father of the Year awards
it's terribly shaken upon hearing the
news all this time the way in which the
war had been fought to keep up
appearances that China itself was not
directly involved military authorities
in the northeastern region had been
running things Jo had been the one to
decide that this war was now a matter
for the central of the
both sides underestimated the other just
as Kimmel song felt the US wouldn't
intervene in Korea so MacArthur felt
about the Chinese he turned out to be
dead wrong about that once this happened
MacArthur began talking about expanding
the war unleashing junk high sex forces
and even going so far as to suggest
nuclear weapons be used in the conflict
by July 1951 the first signal started to
be given out by the UN that an armistice
wouldn't be such a bad idea at this
present time by then MacArthur had been
sacked by his commander-in-chief and
General Omar Bradley had already uttered
the famous words that this was quote the
wrong war and the wrong time with the
wrong enemy end quote so when it came
time to negotiate it was Joe and Lai
who said across the table from the
American side these talks began on July
20th 1951 there's never gonna be a peace
treaty signed still hasn't been signed
into our very day but after two years of
excruciating negotiations three years
two months and two days after it all
started they did hammer out an armistice
his document was signed by Punga why of
Panmunjeom on July 27th 1953 it was said
on that night Joe and I got south Stein
multi something seen only a few times in
his illustrious career as China's
premier for months earlier Stalin had
died Joe and Lai represented China's
official delegation to the funeral while
he was in Moscow Joe used the time to
bring up the matter of the Soviets
sharing the secrets to make the atomic
bomb he's gonna have to wait a long time
for that recipe the war was a propaganda
minister's dream come true for Joe and
lie though it was a bit of a nightmare
as China's foreign minister it fell to
his capable shoulders to counter all the
efforts by the United States to isolate
China the hatred was still throbbing
both sides by the time 1954 rolled
around as a result of the Korean War
suddenly the syngman rhee and junk Ishak
governments became of paramount
importance and central to u.s. foreign
policy and with that the temperature of
the Cold War was lowered a bit more than
it already was in China the
anti-american rhetoric and slogans being
propagated from every sure Jang and
swooned of China was loud and effective
any Westerner missionary businessman and
geo worker whoever you were and
especially if you were an American post
Korean War the heat really got turned up
on you
American attempts to contain communism
and isolate China were very obvious all
the sudden China's neighbors became more
important to us than ever before China's
attempts to gain acceptance at the UN
were rebuffed the way Jo and I saw the
US was leading this charge to isolate
China and you know in so many words make
them look bad jo knew was gonna be up to
him to get out into the world and make
new friends for China and at least get a
dialogue going with those who were for
their own reasons or because of u.s.
pressure weren't so sure they wanted to
be friends with the new China you see
mount had gone around making a lot of
noise about revolution and communists
everywhere uniting together to fight
imperialism and capitalists a lot of
countries had the you-know-whats scared
out of them this was a major concern and
Jo was gonna address this matter
skillfully later on for now he saw that
China's only friends with the communist
countries of Europe and Asia that didn't
add up to too much Jo's big picture
solution was to create a third block
that could serve as an alternative to
the Soviet or American led blocks Jo and
I saw how many countries are were around
the world in Africa Asia and Latin
America that had suffered under
imperialism and colonialism many were
struggling third-world nation
zoo didn't never dog in the us-soviet
fight Joe was determined to reach out to
these nations hit the reset button and
obtain their support 1954 there were two
main diplomatic problems Joe and ly had
to focus on above all else
one was the aftermath and unsettled
issues left over from the Korean War the
other was to be at Nam war ho Chi Minh
had always been a friend and Ally of Joe
and Lai going back to their Paris days
in the 1920s his Viet Minh forces have
been hammering the French and the
prevailing attitude back in the home
country was to get out of Vietnam for
France
it wasn't Vietnam they were called
Indochina Cambodia Laos and Vietnam were
seen as one colonial entity the French
were looking for a graceful exit and how
this all got handled was paramount
importance to Joe and Lai as he began to
get involved the Soviets went to France
the US and Great Britain and proposed
everyone get together around a table
with China and hashed this whole thing
out with Korea and Vietnam in this
meeting became known as the Geneva
conference in 1954 this was Joe's first
major for a onto the world stage as
premier and foreign minister of the
People's Republic of China he had made
three trips to Moscow to prep with
Khrushchev and Molotov the conference
ran from April 26th to July 20th 1954
Joe arrived with an oversized staff of
about 200 for a forum such as this Joe
seized the opportunity to put on his
teachers hat and offer some on-the-job
training to many young and experienced
but up-and-coming foreign ministry
staffers they kept their eyes and ears
open they might learn a thing or two
from someone like Joe and lie now Joe's
ascetic tastes were well known he was
not someone who loved to wallow in
luxury but China's face was on the line
here so they couldn't go showing up in
front of these Western powers like a
bunch of mendicants Joe was ensconced in
the GRANDMONT Flair Lee
Viswa seven kilometers outside Geneva
yeah at the place spruced up a bit flew
in all kinds of furniture and treasures
from China to have lying around awhile
the diplomatic crowds finest chefs were
flown in from Beijing along with all
their pots and pans and cooking utensils
they would be kept busy throughout the
three-month period in this grand edifice
Jo held court meeting with leaders
negotiating getting to know people and
showing them China was hardly the ogre
they were expecting and after all these
years Joe and Lai knew how to put on a
good show and turn on the charm
representing the USA for about a week
and a half was of course Secretary of
State John Foster Dulles older brother
to the long-serving CIA director Allen
Dulles it was John Foster who at the
airport named after him as the story
goes when Joe extended his hand to the
US representative Dulles refused to
shake it that may be true and it may not
be true Dulles was not happy to be there
and not happy that he got strong iron
into having to meet with these two
communist enemies of the US he thought
it was a bad idea to invite the Chinese
and Vietnamese to the meeting this whole
matter of how everyone was supposed to
act just stipple the atmosphere there
were so many rules about who could say
what to whom and protocols to follow but
once Dulles went back to the States and
Walter Bedell Smith took over things
loosened up a bit there would end up
being 15 meetings at all between the US
and China regarding the Korean question
in the end neither side budged the
Korean talks were leading nowhere next
up on the agenda was Indochina the talks
started off with in unexpected bang when
a day before they began on may 8th
Vaughn win' gapps forces aided by
Chinese general wake watching emerged
victorious over the French at the NBN
Phu that shirt
change the tone of the negotiations with
that glorious come-from-behind victory
Pham van dong the Vietnamese
representative of the Ho Chi Minh
government the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam got a little bit too cocky and
became very forceful and demanding about
the unification of the country and
hanging on to territories one
neighboring Laos and Cambodia you may
recall that Vietnam got split up at
Potsdam in 1945 a unified Vietnam
controlled by Ho Chi Minh and allied
with China it was not what the Americans
wanted especially on the heels of what
had just gone down in Korea
no one knew this better than Joe and ly
and so it fell to him to use every ounce
of his formidable diplomatic skills to
convince Bambang dong doe back down farm
of course would serve as North
Vietnamese prime minister from 1955 to
1976 after unification during this phase
of the Geneva Conference it was all Joe
and ly first of all when it came to
schmoozing the Western diplomats and
leaders
he was China's secret weapon the peace
worked out at the Geneva Conference that
settled matters albeit briefly was
written produced and directed by Joe
Enlai and June 23rd Joe flew to Bern to
meet the new French prime minister
pierre mends france Joe's fluency and
French came in handy allowing him to
make a strong connection with Mendez
France
Joe knew that the French were looking
for a way out he did all the necessary
arm twisting and cajoling with thumbs
and dong to get a dialogue going and to
come to a general understanding with the
French president Joe left the two
leaders to hash things out for
themselves and he flew to India next
they have a quick ted out tent with
Nehru there they came up with the idea
for the band own conference something
we'll get to in the next episode Joe and
Nehru were BFFs at this early stage
thanks to Great Britain there were a
couple border issues as yet unresolved
but for the meantime these have been
swept
the rug come October 1962 this won't be
the case for now during this era of
sino-indian good feeling it was thought
why open up that can of worms on June 28
the Geneva Conference is still going on
Joe next flew to Burma to visit with who
knew he was the first Prime Minister of
independent Burma he assumed control
after the assassination of Aung San su
cheese father hong son joe in new shook
hands and the Burmese leader signed on
to chose five principles of peaceful
coexistence this was the deal Joe signed
with Nehru and he was taking the same
idea to anyone who would sign on this
was the deal Joe signed with Nehru and
he was taking the same idea to anyone
who would sign on they were simple and
straightforward one mutual respect for
each other's territorial integrity and
sovereignty two mutual non-aggression
three mutual non-interference in each
other's internal affairs for equality
and cooperation for mutual benefit and
five peaceful coexistence nothing fancy
two days later Joe met Ho Chi Minh in
the city of Leo Joe in Guangxi province
a place famous for thee would grown
there that makes the best coffins this
part of guanxi province had always
served as a base for the Viet Minh going
back to the 1930s buck Ho had a villa
there flush with success and fully aware
the French were itching for a way out of
Vietnam Ho suggested the notion of a
unified Vietnam Joe convinced him as
good as the idea was the time wasn't
ripe Joe told Ho Chi Minh to take the
Geneva agreement as is divided at the
17th parallel and wait a couple years
before any attempt to unify with the
South fom and Homer adamant that the
dividing line should be at the 16th
parallel Joe told them to haggle over 1
degree latitude take it in two years
they could unify the country from there
Joe flew back to Beijing to check in
with you-know-who
and then on July 10th he landed back in
Geneva and when
to meet Pham van dong Pham wasn't as
malleable as pochi men and he still gave
very strong resistance to Jo even
considering his advice a kind of
betrayal believe it or not come 1979
when Vietnam and China have their
three-week and six-day war this whole
matter of jo and lies selling out
Vietnam at the Geneva Conference will be
dredged up for old times sake I guess
but you see Jo and I had many other big
fish to fry besides bump on dong in 1954
jo was desperately trying to hang on to
the crown jewel of China friends these
were the overseas Chinese they were
spread out all over the world and many
of them were loaded influential with
their respective governments but still
maintain loyalties with and had family
in China Jo knew if he let the thumb
bind dong have his way everyone would
know China was behind that decision and
their nation being Thailand Philippines
Indonesia or wherever could be next and
the overseas Chinese knew they'd be
caught in the crosshairs if governments
got paranoid about their ethnic Chinese
population bomb had been insisting that
the Pathet Lao and Khmer isarc be
invited to participate in the talks Jo
had to remind him Cambodia still had a
king as did Laos
so why complicate matters yeah Jo had to
handle this very diplomatically and of
course besides all this Jo knew with a
high degree of certainty under the
present conditions McCarthyism and the
Red Scare now in full swing
if Vietnam was unified under Ho Chi Minh
with France gone the US would come
running he wasn't wrong about that as an
epilogue to the Geneva conference after
everything was signed on July 20th 1954
and everyone had gone home the US and
September 8th went ahead and created
sido the Southeast Asian Treaty
Organization seto essentially was a
mutual defense treaty that said if any
of the members including South Vietnam
was attacked the US would intervene
in December the creation of cito was
followed by of course the Taiwan
Relations Act and once again we became
Zhang Kai shacks big strong buddy those
two things helped a great deal to stoke
the fires of animosity a few thousand
more degrees Kelvin another feather and
Jo's camp was earned when he skillfully
managed to put in place communication
channels with the US they may have been
enemies and would remain so until
Nixon's plane landed at Capital Airport
in February 1972 but joanou unofficial
relations were better than no relations
Joe looked at the tres amigos the US
Britain and France and knew all three
had varying interests where China and
that part of the world was concerned so
he lobbied Britain and France separately
the head of the British delegation was
Sir Anthony Eden Eden and Joe hit it off
at once so well did they get along that
when the subject of Korean War POWs came
up and no solution could be reached
he didn't went to the American side and
said hey man what a china's top leaders
is here why not just discuss this matter
with him directly face-to-face Walter
Bedell Smith couldn't say yes to
something of this magnitude without
checking with Eisenhower first after Ike
gave the okay the two enemies sat down
at the same table and hash things out
one big nun and wangcheng represented
the Chinese and alexis Johnson
negotiating on behalf of the Americans
and thus began sino-us unofficial
relations by December 1960 the two sides
would have already met almost a hundred
times if you recall from those episodes
on Nixon's visit to China it was thanks
to all these unofficial channels that
the coming together of the US and China
was made possible these back-channel
Talks kept going from 1954 to December
1957 stopping for a while and then
picking up again in 1959 by the time Joe
and lai unpacked his suitcase and
settled back in Beijing after the
name a conference you should have felt
pretty good about himself he may try to
look good at a hand in influencing
events and not quite five years into the
birth of the People's Republic of China
it made a lot of new friends and many
channels were put in place that might
lead to normalization of relations
Beijing became a hot destination for
leaders from many nations who wanted to
meet Jo and Mao Khrushchev visited
September 29th to October 12th the main
event was the fifth anniversary of the
founding of the PRC they're getting
along for now his secret speech won't be
until February 1956
well stoppage time is over so let's wind
this up I truly thought we'd get through
the bond own conference in this episode
but that historic meeting and all the
China domestic politics will have to
wait until next time while the Korean
War and Geneva Conference was going on
there was also the GAO gang affair as
well as the Sun Khan and wolf on
campaigns that will be discussed in part
six well that's all for now this is your
humble narrator laszlo montgomery
signing off from a very cozy Airbnb
Paris apartment on liberal Avadh V shot
Lenoir walking in the footsteps of Joe
and Lai himself from 1921 to 1924 I'm
back in Cali soon and I promise right
after de lausanne from the flight back
to LAX I will commence work on Chou
Enlai part 6 until then omoi Meza me
Jameer everyday vous voir la prochaine
fois pour une autre
episode passional de la scheana histoire
podcast